The Synchronous events proposal

This proposal extends the current SBGN ER specification by allowing the description of multiple consequences of the event. It was discussed in SBGN-9 in Edinburgh 2013 that there are cases when we need to represents events that happens simultaneously. The simplest example would be the chemical reaction:

A -{C}-> B

to draw this in ER we have to be able to show that C stimulates deletion of A and creation of B simultaneously. It is not possible to use two outcomes or two stimulation links (figure A) in this case as all statement in ER are independent. According to that diagram it is possible that B is created, but A is not deleted, because outcomes are independent and not garantied to be in true state. Another example would be presentation of rule-based model in ER. It is often required that some event has more then one consequence.

To represent multiple consequences of the statement we propose to represent simultaneous influences by splitting the influence arc in a way similar to how assignment arc is splited to represent multiple values accepted by the state variable (figure B). The major difference would be in an implicit operation hidden behind a splitting point. Instead of XOR in assignment arc splitting point influence arc would have an AND gate.

The diagram on the figure B should be read as "If (or when) C exists, it stimulates degradation of A (A existence set to False) and creation of B (B existence set to True) at the same time". 

Synchronous influences does not need to be of the same type and number of branches is not limited. Most general form of the proposed synchronous influence is presented on figure C.

Another example (figure D): once bacterial RNAP creates short mRNA product of 9-12 bp in length, core RNAP enzyme dissociates from the complex with sigma subunit and leave the promoter. With proposed synchronous influence we can show that as a split of influence coming from outcome on 'S' value assignment to the 'state' variable of 'mRNA'. Notice that elongation of the mRNA product to the full length (assignment 'F' value to the 'state' variable of 'mRNA') is independent event and start from another outcome.